Our New Blog
============

Hi everyone!  Welcome to the new yt Project blog.  We've gotten rid of the old
Posterous-based blog in favor of making it easier to include code, entries from
anybody in the community, and to overall make it easier and clearer how to
contribute.

So, to that end, we've moved to using a combination of pretty cool technologies
to make it easy to blog and have your entry added to the blog.

For the blogging itself, we use `Blohg <http://blohg.org>`_, which is a
mercurial-backed system.  So all the blog entries are stored in a mercurial
repository, on BitBucket (`yt_analysis/blog
<http://bitbucket.org/yt_analysis/blog>`_) and instead of being in HTML or
something, they're written in ReStructured Text (ReST) -- which is the same
format that the yt docstrings and documentation are all written in.  We're
standardizing on ReST, which means to contribute to any of yt, you only have
to learn one way to format your text.  (Plus, ReST is `super easy
<http://docutils.sourceforge.net/docs/user/rst/quickstart.html>`_.)

To add a new entry, you just have to `fork
<http://bitbucket.org/yt_analysis/blog/fork>`_ the blog repository and then
issue a Pull Request.  You can add the entry by creating a new file in the
directory `content/post`, and it'll automatically show up with your name and
the time you added it.  Once your pull request is accepted, the blog will be
*automatically* rebuilt and uploaded to the blog site (thanks to `Shining Panda
<http://shiningpanda-ci.com>`_, which we use for our testing suite -- more on
that later!) which lives inside Amazon's cloud.

But the best part is that this is all hidden behind the scenes.  For all
intents and purposes, you just need to add your text, issue a pull request, and
it'll show up in a few minutes.

But here's the best part -- by converting to this system, we've also made it
easy to include code samples using the `IPython Notebook
<http://ipython.org>`_.  A bunch of the yt developers have started using the
IPython notebook for basically everything -- analysis, teaching, sharing
snippets -- and we want to keep using it for everything.  (If you take a look
over at https://hub.yt-project.org/ you can see that we've started uploading
Notebooks to the yt Data Hub, which then get displayed by the amazing NBViewer
project by the IPython developers.)  So, we made it easy to include a notebook
here in the blog.

To include the notebook, you'll first need a copy of the NBConvert repository,
which will also need to be in your ``PYTHONPATH``.  You may also need to
install the "pandoc" project, but that's usually included in most Linux
distributions and can be gotten with MacPorts.  Once you've added that, just cd
to the blohg directory and run:::

   python2.7 blohg_converter.py /path/to/your/notebook.ipynb

This will grab all the images and put them in the right directories inside the
blog repository, add a new ``.rst`` file, and then you're set to go.  Just run
``hg ci -A`` and you're good to go!

Because this blog is a bit new, we're still working through some kinks.
Already as I've made a couple changes, the RSS feed has marked itself as
completely updated; this is an error, so I'm trying to figure out what's going
on and fix it up.  So I apologize in advance if any other minor glitches happen
along the way!

With this change in the blogging system, I think we've lowered the barrier to
sharing with the community changes in yt, new features, and even showing old
features using the Notebook.  I'm really optimistic

And if you have something you would like to share -- a new paper you've
written, something cool you've done (even if not in yt!) or anything else, go
ahead and `fork <http://bitbucket.org/yt_analysis/blog/fork>`_ the repository and
write up a blog post -- everything you need comes in the box!
