Particle Generators
===================


`Notebook Download <https://hub.yt-project.org/go/mf0ba2>`_


Generating particle initial conditions is now possible in yt. The
following shows how to generate particle fields from pre-defined
particle lists, lattice distributions, and distributions based on
density fields.

First, we define a gridded density field where the particle density
field has been "cloud-in-cell" (CIC) interpolated to the grid, and
define a function that assigns a set of particle indices based on a
number of particles and a starting index. This is for a case where we
want to add particles to an already existing set but make sure they have
uniqune indices.

In[20]:

.. sourcecode:: python

    from yt.mods import *
    from yt.utilities.particle_generator import *
    import yt.utilities.initial_conditions as ic
    import yt.utilities.flagging_methods as fm
    from yt.frontends.stream.api import refine_amr
    from yt.utilities.lib import CICDeposit_3
    
    def _pgdensity(field, data):
        blank = np.zeros(data.ActiveDimensions, dtype='float32')
        if data.NumberOfParticles == 0: return blank
        CICDeposit_3(data["particle_position_x"].astype(np.float64),
                     data["particle_position_y"].astype(np.float64),
                     data["particle_position_z"].astype(np.float64),
                     data["particle_gas_density"].astype(np.float32),
                     np.int64(data.NumberOfParticles),
                     blank, np.array(data.LeftEdge).astype(np.float64),
                     np.array(data.ActiveDimensions).astype(np.int32),
                     np.float64(data['dx']))
        return blank
    add_field("particle_density_cic", function=_pgdensity,
              validators=[ValidateGridType()], 
              display_name=r"$\mathrm{Particle}\/\mathrm{Density}$")
    
    def add_indices(npart, start_num) :
        return np.arange((npart)) + start_num

Next, we'll set up a uniform grid with some random density data:

In[21]:

.. sourcecode:: python

    domain_dims = (128, 128, 128)
    dens = 0.1*np.random.random(domain_dims)
    fields = {"Density": dens}
    ug = load_uniform_grid(fields, domain_dims, 1.0)

As a first example, we'll generate particle fields from pre-existing
NumPy arrays. First, we define a list of particle field names, and then
assign random positions to the particles in one corner of the grid. We
then call FromListParticleGenerator, which generates the particles.
assign\_indices assigns the indices (using numpy.arange by default).
apply\_to\_stream applies the particle fields to the grid.

In[22]:

.. sourcecode:: python

    num_particles1 = 10000
    field_list = ["particle_position_x","particle_position_y",
                  "particle_position_z","particle_gas_density"]
    x = np.random.uniform(low=0.0, high=0.5, size=num_particles1) # random positions
    y = np.random.uniform(low=0.0, high=0.5, size=num_particles1) # random positions
    z = np.random.uniform(low=0.0, high=0.5, size=num_particles1) # random positions
    pdata = {'particle_position_x':x,
             'particle_position_y':y,
             'particle_position_z':z}
    particles1 = FromListParticleGenerator(ug, num_particles1, pdata)
    particles1.assign_indices()
    particles1.apply_to_stream()

.. parsed-literal::

    yt : [INFO     ] 2013-01-01 21:24:32,484 Adding Density to list of fields
    yt : [INFO     ] 2013-01-01 21:24:32,486 Adding particle_position_z to list of fields
    yt : [INFO     ] 2013-01-01 21:24:32,487 Adding particle_index to list of fields
    yt : [INFO     ] 2013-01-01 21:24:32,487 Adding particle_position_x to list of fields
    yt : [INFO     ] 2013-01-01 21:24:32,488 Adding particle_position_y to list of fields


Now that the particles are part of the parameter file, they may be
manipulated and plotted:

In[23]:

.. sourcecode:: python

    slc = SlicePlot(ug, 2, ["Density"], center=ug.domain_center)
    slc.set_cmap("Density","spring")
    slc.annotate_particles(0.2, p_size=10.0) # Display all particles within a thick slab 0.2 times the domain width
    slc.show()

.. attachment-image:: ParticleGenerator_files/ParticleGenerator_ipynb_fig_00.png

Now let's try adding a particle distribution in a lattice-shaped spatial
arrangement. Let's choose ten particles on a side, and place them in a
small region away from the random particles. We'll use the special
add\_indices function we defined earlier to assign indices that are all
different from the ones the already existing particles have.

In[24]:

.. sourcecode:: python

    pdims = np.array([10,10,10]) # number of particles on a side in each dimension
    ple = np.array([0.6,0.6,0.6]) # left edge of particle positions
    pre = np.array([0.9,0.9,0.9]) # right edge of particle positions
    particles2 = LatticeParticleGenerator(ug, pdims, ple, pre, field_list)
    particles2.assign_indices(function=add_indices, npart=np.product(pdims),
                              start_num=num_particles1)
    particles2.apply_to_stream()

.. parsed-literal::

    yt : [INFO     ] 2013-01-01 21:24:33,957 Adding particle_gas_density to list of fields


We now have both sets of particles:

In[25]:

.. sourcecode:: python

    slc = SlicePlot(ug, 2, ["Density"], center=ug.domain_center)
    slc.set_cmap("Density","spring")
    slc.annotate_particles(0.2, p_size=10.0)
    slc.show()

.. attachment-image:: ParticleGenerator_files/ParticleGenerator_ipynb_fig_01.png

And by sorting all of the indices we can check that all of them are
unique, as advertised:

In[26]:

.. sourcecode:: python

    dd = ug.h.all_data()
    indices = np.sort(np.int32(dd["particle_index"]))
    print "All indices unique = ", np.all(np.unique(indices) == indices)

.. parsed-literal::

    All indices unique =  True


Now let's get fancy. We will use the initial conditions capabilities of
yt to apply a spherically symmetric density distribution based on the
"beta-model" functional form, and set up a refinement method based on
overdensity. Then, we will call refine\_amr to apply this density
distribution and refine the grid based on the overdensity over some
value.

In[27]:

.. sourcecode:: python

    fo = [ic.BetaModelSphere(1.0,0.1,0.5,[0.5,0.5,0.5],{"Density":(10.0)})] 
    rc = [fm.flagging_method_registry["overdensity"](4.0)]
    pf = refine_amr(ug, rc, fo, 3)

Now, we have an interesting density field to serve as a distribution
function for particle positions. What we do next is define a spherical
region over which particle positions will be generated based on the
local grid density. We also will map the grid density to a particle
density field using cloud-in-cell interpolation. Finally, when we apply
these particles, we will set the optional argument clobber=True, which
will remove the particles we already created.

In[28]:

.. sourcecode:: python

    num_particles3 = 100000
    map_dict = {"Density": "particle_gas_density"} # key is grid field, value is particle field
    sphere = pf.h.sphere(pf.domain_center, (0.5, "unitary"))
    particles3 = WithDensityParticleGenerator(pf, sphere, num_particles3,
                                              field_list)
    particles3.assign_indices()
    particles3.map_grid_fields_to_particles(map_dict) # Map density fields to particle fields
    particles3.apply_to_stream(clobber=True) # Get rid of all pre-existing particles

Now we'll plot up both the grid density field and the
"particle\_density\_cic" field (defined at the top of the script), which
is mapped from the particles onto the grid. We also overplot the
particle positions. These should roughly correspond to the non-zero
values of "particle\_density\_cic", but there will be some discrepancies
due to the fact that they are taken from a thick slab and only a slice
of the grid-based field is shown.

In[29]:

.. sourcecode:: python

    slc = SlicePlot(pf, 2, ["Density","particle_density_cic"], center=pf.domain_center)
    slc.set_log("Density", True)
    slc.set_log("particle_density_cic", True)
    slc.set_cmap("all", "spring")
    slc.annotate_grids()
    slc.annotate_particles(0.01,p_size=3)
    slc.show()

.. attachment-image:: ParticleGenerator_files/ParticleGenerator_ipynb_fig_02.png

.. attachment-image:: ParticleGenerator_files/ParticleGenerator_ipynb_fig_03.png

