yt development: All-sky column density calculation
==================================================

.. author: Matt

.. date: 1297685580.0

This week I added the ability to calculate all-sky column densities.  This
functionality uses `HEALpix <http://healpix.jpl.nasa.gov/>`_ to calculate
equally-area regions on the sky and then shoots out rays from a central source
to some fixed radius, accumulating values of a field along the way.  Although
so far I've only used it to calculate column densities of "Density" it could be
used for other values as well, including all- sky weighted averages of
quantities.

This works via a new HEALpixCamera object, which accepts an Nside argument (the
number of pixels is 12*Nside*Nside) as well as a center and a radius.  It's
still a bit rough around the edges, but currently it will work to generate
projections over the entire sky.

It's important to note that the difficulties inherent in sorting bricks
radially prevent it from being used for transfer functions that involve any
absorption.  This means that currently it only works with
"ProjectionTransferFunction" as an input.

To generate the projected pixels, we have to create a camera and ask it to cast
rays along each pixel.  This script will do that:

.. code:: python

   from yt.mods import *
   import yt.visualization.volume_rendering.camera as camera
   Nside = 32
   pf = load('DD0008/galaxy0008')
   cam = camera.HEALpixCamera([0.5,0.5,0.5], 0.2, Nside, pf = pf, log_fields = [False])
   bitmap = cam.snapshot()

The returned bitmap will, as per usual, be an array of integrated values.
Because we're using the projection transfer function, with the HEALpix camera,
it will be an ordered pixel list of shape (12*Nside*Nside, 1, 4) where the
first channel is ordered in order of pixels as per the HEALpix notation.  We
now have to convert this to a regularly gridded set of values, between 0 and
2pi and 0 and pi, for the theta and phi coordinates.

yt provides a helper function to go from pixel ID to angle (as well as a few
other things).  You can access this helper function in this manner:

.. code:: python

   import yt.utilities.amr_utils as au
   from numpy import pi
   phi, theta = na.mgrid[0.0:2*pi:800j, 0:pi:800j]
   pixi = au.arr_ang2pix_nest(Nside,
   theta.ravel(), phi.ravel())
   img = na.log10(bitmap[:,0,0][pixi]).reshape((800,800))

The call to `mgrid
<http://docs.scipy.org/doc/numpy/reference/generated/numpy.mgrid.html>`_
creates a regularly-spaced mesh of values.  We then ask HEALpix what the pixel
IDs are that fall into each of these regularly spaced mesh values, and then we
apply those pixels in that order.  This transformation will, someday, be
implicit in the snapshot() call.

At this point we can plot our regularly spaced mesh using one of several
projections.  We'll do the `Mollweide
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mollweide_projection>`_ projection.  To do this,
we import the appropriate Matplotlib components and plot using the imshow
command:

.. code:: python

   import matplotlib.figure
   import matplotlib.backends.backend_agg

   fig = matplotlib.figure.Figure((10, 5))
   ax = fig.add_subplot(1,1,1,projection='mollweide')
   image = ax.imshow(img,
   extent=(-pi,pi,-pi/2,pi/2), clip_on=False, aspect=0.5)
   cb = fig.colorbar(image, orientation='horizontal')
   cb.set_label(r'$\mathrm{Column}\/\mathrm{Density}\/[\mathrm{g}/\mathrm{cm}^2]$')
   canvas = matplotlib.backends.backend_agg.FigureCanvasAgg(fig)
   canvas.print_figure('allsky.png')

As you can see, it's currently still a bit rough-around-the-edges (the image is
below) but it's on the way to being very useful.  In particular, setting Nside
higher above should improve the image quality, and adjusting the axis display
in matplotlib can remove the latitude and longitude display.  There is also
currently a bug (which I have reported but not heard back on) in matplotlib
related to changing the size of the axes object.

Hopefully soon enough this will be ready to be wrapped more simply into yt, and
it can be made available in a more straightforward fashion.  For now, `paste
1503 <http://paste.enzotools.org/show/1503>`_ includes a full script that will
all-sky render and output an image like the one below.  

.. attachment-image:: allsky.png

