Dataset Tracking with yt
========================

.. author: Stephen Skory <s@skory.us>

.. date: 1315842780

In this post I'd like to discuss a bit of work in progress to highlight some
exciting new features that we hope to have working in yt sometime soon.

On any machine that runs yt, there is a file created in the users home
directory named ``~/.yt/parameter_files.csv`` that yt uses internally to keep
track of datasets it has seen. This is just a simple text file containing
comma-separated entries with a few pieces of information about datasets, like
their location on disk and the last date and time they were 'seen' by yt. To
keep this file from exploding, it's kept at some maximum number of entries.
But, clearly, text is not the ideal way to store this kind of information for
anything over a few hundred entries. Recently Matt has been working on updating
this system to use a SQLite database, which should have several advantages over
the text file in terms of speed and disk usage.

This got me thinking about what could be done to extend this local listing of
datasets into something more useful, *globally*.  What if there was a way to
view any and all datasets ever seen by yt in one convenient place? It could be
searchable over a number of attributes, including creation date and when it was
last seen by yt, and it would list which machine the dataset is stored on.
Finally, this functionality should be transparent to the user once it is set up
(with minimal effort) - the global listing of datasets should just be updated
automatically in the background as part of the normal workflow.

Over a couple days last week I did a quick and dirty implementation of this
using `Amazon AWS SimpleDB <http://aws.amazon.com/simpledb/>`_ and a simple
web-cgi script I wrote in Python. The advantages of SimpleDB are that it is "in
the cloud" (sheesh) and very inexpensive. In fact, for small databases with low
usage levels, it is free. (As an aside, Amazon is very generous with academic
grants, which could be used for this or other yt-related services.) The Python
script is very simple and can be `cloned off of BitBucket
<https://bitbucket.org/sskory/mydb/overview>`_. The script can be run on any
computer with a webserver and Python (which includes Macs and Linux machines),
and I envision a website (perhaps mydb.yt-project.org, for example) being
created where a user can login from anywhere to view their datasets easily.

The entire thing is not finished yet: the updates to SimpleDB are not
automatic, nor have we settled on a final list of which attributes to store in
the listing. However, in two days I was able to get enough working to show what
I think are the key killer features of the system in a screencast which I've
linked below. I should note that in the time since I made the screencast, I
have made a few improvements. In particular, the numerical columns can now be
sorted correctly.

I'm excited about the prospects for a simple system like this!

.. vimeo:: 28797703

