Announcing the 2012 yt Workshop
===============================

.. author: Matt

.. date: 1317680669.0

I'm pleased to announce the 2012 yt Workshop at the FLASH Center in Chicago,
January 24-26.

The workshop will be aimed at both users and developers of yt.  We will begin
with intensive user training, moving from basic usage to advanced and parallel
usage.  Users are encouraged to bring their ideas and prototypes for new
analysis routines as there will be opportunities to work with more experienced
developers.  We will then address to how to modify, extend and contribute to
yt, and transition to a developers workshop.  In the developers portion of the
workshop, we will discuss ideas for improvements to the code and then break
into groups to implement new features.  Users are highly encouraged to stay and
participate in development.  The FLASH Center has graciously offered to host
the workshop.  We have identified a hotel in downtown Chicago (near the river,
just off Michigan Avenue) that we are able to book double-occupancy rooms for
$99/night, pre-tax.  We are actively pursuing funding opportunities, but as of
yet have not secured funding for participant costs; if we are able to do so, it
will likely cover hotel stays for a limited number of individuals willing to
share rooms for the four nights of the workshop (Jan. 23-26).

As we prepare hotel reservations, funding applications and other
technicalities, we need to get a sense of not only how many people are
potentially going to attend, but also their current career stage, funding
availability and so on. If you are interested in attending the workshop, we
would greatly appreciate it if you would visit the following URL and fill out
the Google Form: `http://goo.gl/xElrB <http://goo.gl/xElrB>`_ .  If you have
already filled it out, no need to do it again!

Once we have the details of the conference settled, further information will be
forthcoming regarding registration, accommodations, and possible financial
support.

For specific questions regarding the workshop, please email John ZuHone at
`jzuhone [at] milkyway.gsfc.nasa.gov`.

