yt Development: Treecodes, GUIs, IRC and more!
==============================================

.. author: Matthew Turk <matthewturk@gmail.com>

.. date: 1301917254

It's been nearly a month since the last yt development post; in that time,
there's been quite a bit of development in a couple different areas.  This
is culminating in a 2.1 release, for which Sam Skillman is release manager,
sometime in the next few days.

Streamlines and Treecode
------------------------

SamS has spent some time over the last month developing two types of streamline
code.  The first integrates a series of streamlines over a selection of the
domain, which can then be visualizing using the mplot3d package.  The other
aspect of this involves selecting one of these integrated streamlines, which is
then transformed into an AMR1DData object, which can be queried for values and
plotted in other ways.  Sam has documented both of these modes of streamline
integration and they'll be included in a new build of the documentation
presently.

StephenS has been hard at work on developing a treecode for speeding up the
binding energy calculation of clumps or other regions.  To that end, he's
implemented not only the treecode itself (using some of the octree
functionality which had as-yet been unused in yt) but also a series of tests.
He sees substantial speedups, and it has been documented to become part of the
next release.

Development Bootstrap and Pasteboards
-------------------------------------

The process of getting up and running with Mercurial and with development of yt
can be a bit tricky.  To try to alleviate that, I've added a new command, "yt
bootstrap_dev" that will handle this.  It will set up a bitbucket user, set up
a couple handly hg extensions, and also create a 'pasteboard.'  The pasteboard
itself is still a bit in flux, so it's not being touted just yet as a major
feature, but I think it has some promise.  The idea behind it is to create a
semi-permanent mechanism for sharing scripts and so forth; it's a versions hg
repository which lives on BitBucket's servers, from which scripts can be
programmatically downloaded, embedded, or viewed.

You can see mine at `http://matthewturk.bitbucket.org
<http://matthewturk.bitbucket.org/>`_.  If you've used the bootstrap_dev
command, you can play with the pasteboards with "yt pasteboard" and "yt
pastegrab", but be forewarned they might not be completely working yet!

Web GUI and PlotWindow
----------------------

JeffO has been hard at work rethinking and rebuilding the plotting system in
yt.  He's started with the concept of the PlotCollection and thrown it out!
The PlotCollection dates from a time when our mechanism for interacting with
plots was actually fundamentally different; in the first few months of yt's
existence, it was operated through a GUI called 'HippoDraw' which operated with
worksheets.  The mapping was from a single worksheet to a single plot
collection.

Nowadays, however, it seems that the most common use of making a plot
collection is to make a bunch of plots that aren't quite synced up in the same
way that they were with HippoDraw.  So Jeff has been rethinking the plotting
system, sticking close to the idea of 'conduits' of data that are present in
other systems like the AMRData system.  You should be able to take a porthole
into the data, toss it down, and then simply receive back an image that is
visible through that porthole.

Over the last couple weeks he's made quite a bit of progress in that, which
enabled us to add it as a widget in a forthcoming GUI for yt.  &hellip;and,
speaking of the GUI, we now have a quite functional protoype of a GUI working.
This is the fifth (!) GUI that has been designed for yt.  BrittonS, CameronH
and JeffO and I took a few days and worked very hard on creating a useful,
extensible, and maintainable GUI.  (Britton, in fact, had one of the best
quotes of the sprint.  I said something like, "I'm looking forward to this
GUI."  Britton replied, "I'm looking forward to this being the *last* GUI."  I
couldn't agree with this sentiment more.)

All of the previous versions and implementations of GUIs for yt -- HippoDraw,
then the original GUI called Reason and written in wxPython, then the
subsequent TraitsUI wxPython Reason version 2.0, and finally the Tkinter-based
Fisheye -- were dependent on a whole stack of dependencies.  These included
things like wx, GTK, Qt, and on and on and on.  These were difficult to install
in an automated fashion, but more than that, they added an incredible level of
complexity to the installation and to using these GUIs on supercomputer
centers.

So we decided to get rid of all of that, and return to the basics.  We built a
Web GUI, where the widgets, the toolkits, events, and everything are all
handled by a web browser, using JavaScript.  The decision to do this ultimately
came down to a maintainability issue -- there's no compilation necessary,
everybody has a web browser, and it can be done trivially over SSH (with far
less bandwidth than is required for a comparative X11 session being forwarded.)

The underlying system is just a Python interpreter; when buttons are pressed,
they simply call functions that are available in the interpreter.  It's
fundamentally a mechanism for issuing commands, displaying results of those
commands (including images), and then on top of this we have begun adding
widgets.

Cameron summarized some of this in an `email to the developer list
<http://lists.spacepope.org/pipermail
/yt-dev-spacepope.org/2011-March/001210.html>`_.  It's still in testing, but
*is* available for testing, despite not being documented.  This will be a big
part of a 2.2 release of yt.

IRC
---

There's now an IRC channel for yt, on `FreeNode <http://freenode.net/>`_.
There aren't usually that many people in there (sometimes it's just me!) but
the bot from `CIA.vc <http://CIA.vc>`_ will echo all pushed commits to the
channel.  You can use a client like `Adium <http://adium.im>`_, `Irssi
<http://irssi.org>`_, or one of the other Linux or OSX clients, to connect to
irc.freenode.net and then to join the channel #yt ("/join #yt").

We'll occasionally have development talk here, but it could also be viewed as a
faster turnover mechanism for getting help, chatting about oddities, and
suggesting feedback.  If you're interested in getting started developing on yt
or fixing bugs, this would be the perfect way to get your feet wet.  We'll also
likely have some coordinated development sessions here in the future.

See you next week!

