ParaView and yt
===============

.. author: Matthew Turk <matthewturk@gmail.com>

.. date: 1308013774

Thanks to some awesome work by developers at Kitware, yt can now be called from
within ParaView!

This relies on a couple things, all of which are pretty exciting moving
forward.  The idea behind this is to leverage where the two codes have their
own strengths and weaknesses, and identify places where they can work
productively together.  For instance, yt has been designed to provide
astrophysical analysis; in this way, it can generate adaptive projections,
spectral energy distributions and so on.  By feeding data to yt (and not asking
yt to read any on its own) these functions can be called from within ParaView,
and images and results returned back to ParaView.

The strategy taken has, so far, been a light one.  Almost all of the yt
machinery has been left in place; what happens is a relatively simple process:

   * Load data into ParaView
   * Feed data into yt
   * Construct IO handlers that pass the contents of internal VTK structures
     to yt through a custom ``IOHandlerBase`` implementation.
   * Construct a hierarchy from the existing contents of the
     ``vtkHierarchicalBoxDataSet`` object, and its attendant child objects.
   * Execute analysis
   * Return processed data to paraview


We're currently investigating how to streamline this process; currently, it
utilizes a new frontend I wrote that was designed to stream data into yt from
arbitrary locations.  This can act as a proxy for datasets that are already
loaded into yt, for datasets that are constructed *ab initio* in yt and for
accepting data through in-memory transfer from ParaView!  One of the fun
applications of this will be using ParaView as a means for conducting
`Co-processing <http://www.kitware.com/blog/home/post/28>`_ of data.

Thanks very much to Jorge, Berk, Charles and George at Kitware for all your
hard work to make this happen.  This is going to be a really fun way to explore
new methods for analysis moving forward.

Not only is this exciting because it enables better cross-talk between yt and
ParaView, but also because of the technology that is being developed on both
sides.  The stream handler in yt, in particular, is a great output from this:
it can be used in the future to construct arbitrary datasets in memory, as well
as to prototype new frontends for codebases.  When yt gains the ability to
write out datasets for various code types, this will be a valuable tool for
constructing datasets from scratch.

For more information, see `this pose
<http://public.kitware.com/pipermail/amr/2011-June/000027.html>`_ on the AMR
mailing list at Kitware, which contains an example script.  While this
functionality will be in the 2.2 release, it will be highlighted in the 2.3
release as we streamline and work out bugs in a proper ParaView frontend.
