===========
yt-dev 2013
===========

We are proud to officially announce the upcoming 2013 yt developer workshop.
This three day event, to be held on the campus of the University of California,
Santa Cruz on March 6th through 8th, will bring together a diverse group of 
students, researchers, and developers.

Up to this point, yt development has proceeded largely over the internet,
leveraging `e-mail lists`_, our `online code repository`_, and `IRC`_ to track,
discuss, and evaluate changes to the code.  Unfortunately, this model makes it
difficult to jump in to development as a newcomer.  This workshop will not only
allow experienced developers to collaborate in person on new features, but will
also be a means for new developers to learn what yt is about and begin
contributing.  The workshop will include several training sessions, constituting
a primer in distributed version control, test-driven development, and best
practices for scientific programming.

The workshop will also serve as a venue to plan and execute some of the major
new features we are planning for the upcoming yt 3.0 release, including full
support for outputs of Lagrangian codes like Gadget, Gasoline and AREPO, better 
support for oct-based codes like ART and RAMSES, initial conditions generation, 
the new Grid Data Format, a new way of handling units and unit conversion, 
non-cartesian geometries, and advanced graphical browser widgets inside the 
iPython notebook.

More information and a registration form for the workshop are available on the
`workshop website`_. We have limited funding support for hotels and airfare.
Funds will be preferentially distributed to students and the level of individual
support will depend on demand.

If you have questions or concerns about the workshop, please feel free to
contact the organizers at workshop2013@yt-project.org.

On behalf of the organizing committee,

Nathan Goldbaum

.. _e-mail lists: http://lists.spacepope.org/listinfo.cgi/yt-dev-spacepope.org
.. _online code repository: https://bitbucket.org/yt_analysis
.. _IRC: http://yt-project.org/irc.html
.. _workshop website: http://yt-project.org/workshop2013
